[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is where humanity is far
closer to our perspective than
many believe.
As those of you who
have had awakened
experiences where you have
been able to feel yourself
as part of everything, you too
can attest to the realization
that everything is everything,
and everyone is everyone.
And it is a hall of mirrors.
And that is universal light.
When you are in
universal light, you
are able to see very far
down and through the hall
of mirrors, and so that you
can see how everything connects
to everything else,
which we understand
can look like a horror show
to some of you at times.
But from our
perspective, you are
all energy experiencing form.
You all know this in
your deepest hearts,
your deepest soul knowing.
The gift of being
on Earth is that you
get to temporarily
forget it for a while.
[VOICE ECHOING]
>> So Lee, here we are.
>> Hi.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> Yeah, thank you.
>> And thanks for doing this.
I'd love to sort of get
to know you a little bit,
and-- well, we've kind of gotten
to know each other a little bit
this morning.
But for our audience who's
not familiar with your work,
fill us in a little bit.
>> Sure.
So when I was 22, I heard
the voice of my guides.
And I wasn't looking for it.
I was definitely
interested in metaphysics.
And I was intuitive.
I hadn't really understood that.
However, I would pull
tarot cards for friends.
Because I loved tarot cards.
And I'd never learned what
any of the cards meant,
but I could pull cards for
friends, and kind of get stuff.
So there was there
was something there.
But one day, as I
was going to my job
in fundraising at the
time, in England, I
was on the underground
train, and I heard,
very clearly from
the left-hand side
of my head, a very
positive, loving voice
answer the negative
self-doubting voice
that I had in my head.
And that had never
happened before.
And at first, I didn't quite
know what was going on.
You think, am I going mad?
Is this schizophrenia?
Voices in my head.
But the reality is we all have
voices in our head anyway.
And I could identify that
the self-doubt in mine,
or the self-attack in mine was
suddenly being counterbalanced
by a wise, loving voice.
So I--
>> And it was clear?
>> It was--
>> Like a normal voice?
>> --really clear, like that.
[SNAPS FINGERS]
Which is also why I doubted it.
Because I wasn't
meditating, I wasn't
in Peru, or all
the ideas that you
have about how channelers hear
their guides, their entities.
The way it works for me when
I channel for people is I
will repeat the first four,
five, six words that I hear.
So I'll close my eyes, I'll
go into a channeled state.
And when it's time to
begin-- which can be 30,
60 seconds in--
I will usually see,
like in writing,
I'll see like four or five
words that are the beginning.
And if I repeat those,
then it's like we're in.
>> Gets you in there.
>> And then--
>> So you can ride the waves.
>> And then the words
just come through, yeah.
And I get to listen.
>> Cool.
And so what was your
process from going
from hearing the voices
to full-on channeling,
and publicly?
>> Yeah, it was actually working
for people, interestingly.
Because I spent two years
doing readings for people
semi-privately.
I mean, it was a public
thing that I was doing,
but it wasn't on the internet.
You know, I had a website, but
it was basically for people
to find me.
And my first website was
called Guidance2012.com.
And it was the friend who was
a yoga teacher and an author.
Her name is Anaiya Sophia.
She has several books out.
And at the time--
her name was Julie at
the time I met her.
And she was a Kundalini
yoga teacher and a shaman.
And I went to her
for some yoga lessons
and some of her
shamanic sessions,
and thought she was great.
And a few friends at the time
who were spiritually open,
I would read for them.
And I couldn't help it.
I'd sit with you for
coffee, and you'd
be talking about something,
and I would hear things,
and get stalked by
the information, which
doesn't happen anymore,
didn't happen as soon
as I started doing it for work.
But I would be hounded
by this information.
So I would say, hey, Ruben, I've
got some things coming through.
I'd give you the information.
And usually it
always helped people.
So she came to me
and said, hey, what
you said to me
about my boyfriend
and I really put us back on
track in our relationship.
You should do this.
I've got a newsletter
list of 300 people.
I was like, wow, 300 people.
She was like, I'll
send it out to them.
Could you do it for the public?
And I was like, well, maybe.
Maybe if they sent me three
questions I could try.
I've never done that.
But that's how I was
doing it for myself.
I would go home
every night, and I
would ask questions of the Zs.
I would write down
these questions,
and then I would
write their answers.
>> OK.
So it started almost in
an automatic writing--
>> Very much.
>> --type of--
>> --situation.
>> So your three
questions would come like,
should I move to Japan?
I've got this thing going
on, and can you give me--
and literally I would get
about 2,000 words on average.
So sometimes it was like 2,500--
>> Just from three questions?
>> Sometimes it was like 1,000.
Yeah, so usually
about 600, 700 words.
And that would
take me 90 minutes.
I'd kind of just be writing
constantly for an hour.
And then I do a grammar sweep
and additional sentences that
would come in the second way.
And so I was sending
these to people.
And then after about
a year I decided
to go to telephone and to Skype.
And initially I hated
the telephone and Skype.
It made me more nervous.
But that was how I started
verbally channeling for people.
>> So the questions brought
through the channeling
in a way?
>> Well, twofold actually.
I learned-- you know,
it's really hard for me
to remember the very
first ones that I
did on telephone and Skype
because it's 14 years ago.
But the way I would
work with people
in the last kind of
eight years, I guess,
is you would call me or
appear on Skype video.
I'd know your name.
And I would, for the
first 30 minutes,
not in Zs channeling
mode, just as myself,
I would tell you about
your past, present,
and future for about 25
minutes, just like a monologue.
And then you'd ask
me some questions.
And then usually, in my more
recent sessions, the Zs,
I would bring in for
like the last 10 minutes,
just to give a kind of
high-frequency ending
and overview.
But it's all connected
for me anyway.
So if I go into
intuitive mode, I
know they're, like,
feeding the top.
It's just that I'm dealing
with the kind of middle layers.
And for me, I got really
passionate about that.
Because I saw so many people,
with channeling, floating off.
And I had those
experiences myself, too.
Channeling could--
>> Floating off.
Can you describe?
So--
>> What does that mean?
>> You'd see people float
out of the channeling room,
and not know what to do with it.
So for example, an hour of
a channel, they're like, ah,
and they kind of
float out of the room.
And then they crash
down a few days later,
but they don't know
how to apply it.
>> I see, I see.
>> So for me, after a while, I
got passionate about the middle
ground.
It's like, OK, well here's
some of the higher-frequency
information.
How do we apply that to our
human patterns and programming?
Because that was also
my query and path.
And so that was how I
became what me and my team
refer to as an energy
intuitive, where you're really
just intuitively reading energy
and translating it for people,
which I think has been
one of my main jobs
for the last 10 years, and that
work, really being an energy
translator, giving language
to the energetic of things.
>> Well, that's sort of
goal with this series,
is to take all this channeled
material collectively,
and then, through this
interview process,
sort of step it down a
couple notches for people
to understand.
Because sometimes it is--
it just hit you.
And it feels good, and
you're like, oh, yeah.
But how do you integrate
that into your life?
So I definitely-- I can relate.
And I'm on the same page there.
So, well, now you're
in the States.
So tell us about
this transition.
So how long did you do this work
in England, and coming here?
>> So I began this work in 2004.
And then in 2006, I had
a partner-- a channeler
and an author-- and we
were partners in life
and in work for three years.
And we were going to move to
the states together around 2008
but then he decided
it wasn't for him.
And around the same
time, we split.
And I was brought to the
States in 2009 to do a retreat
and I was taken to
Boulder, Colorado.
And I was so in the
middle of the split
that I wasn't thinking clearly.
But as soon as I got to
Boulder, it was like,
oh, you're supposed
to move here alone.
And you're going
to move to Boulder.
And that will be
your landing pad.
So I finally made
that happen by 2012.
It took a few years
of coming back.
Yeah, I got a visa,
and moved here in 2012.
And it was so funny, a woman--
I was in Costco of
all places, in the UK,
when I was 20 years old.
And I was at drama school.
I was completing what had been
a pretty successful childhood
with acting.
That was kind of like
a skill I really had.
I could shamanically
transform into other people.
I was a character actor.
But I was bored of acting.
It's like it had been the
thing I was really good at.
But I already knew,
going to drama school,
I was going to have
to do other things.
And I really wanted
to direct film.
And this woman in
Costco stopped me.
And she was she was handing
out samples of food.
And it was at the
end of this aisle.
It was like ice cream.
And she said, would
you like to try this?
And we were just chatting.
She was lovely.
And she said, OK, I
need to stop you now.
I'm an intuitive.
And I need to tell
you something.
And I was like rabbit
in the headlights,
because this was
before the channeling.
She said, you're going
to live in America.
She said, England is
too small for you.
The ceiling is too low.
You're going to do
very well in America.
That's what you're going to go.
So I immediately-- I walked
away and was in shock,
and translated that film.
I was like, oh, well, there's
a lot of film in America.
Maybe--
But I kind of forgot about it.
And then, years
later, I remembered,
just after I got
my visa, not only
the fact that I've moved
here, but that, interestingly,
Americans were 50% of the people
who were following my work.
>> Even at that time.
>> Yeah, it was kind of logical
that I kind of ended up here.
But I felt good when I was here.
So the only thing about
being here that I don't like
is I miss my family, and I miss
some of my friends in England.
That's the cost of living
in this place for me.
>> Well, do you find in America
that there's more openness
to this idea of
channel material,
intuitive psychic phenomena
and these kinds of things?
>> Definitely.
I mean, I think,
like anywhere, there
are people who are not into it.
But there's something in
the ground here as well.
It's interesting.
I think mysticism in
England is strong.
But not so much in the
last 100 or so years.
I think "Harry Potter" is
great, because it's kind of--
that phenomenon has
brought back and re-owned
some of England's
history around mysticism.
But yeah, America just seems
a little more open to it.
And I think there's something
about the land here.
There are some really hot
spots in America, energy-wise,
that I think help
support that whole thing.
>> I've noticed this, too.
I spent some time in Japan.
My wife's Japanese.
And even though they have
this ancient history, culture
of mysticism, monsters,
and creatures,
and just out-there stuff,
as far as them embracing,
when you talk about channeling
or psychic phenomenon
in general, they're
very standoffish of it.
It's sort of like,
oh no, that's fake.
This is real, that's fake.
And I'm like, well, what
about all your history
and your-- well, that's fake.
And I'm like, it
wasn't fake back then.
So I'm just curious, in
England, is that the same?
It sounds like it might
be a little similar.
>> I think to some degree.
And you know, I haven't lived
in England for six years.
So I don't feel
like a great person
to talk about it right now.
Just because a lot's
happened in six years.
I think the thing that I
noticed that is something--
there's something I see.
I feel like because of
the culture in America
that, again, has changed
in the last decade.
But there's a culture
in America of you
can be anything, do
anything, and there is, like,
a support of that.
>> An acceptance of it.
>> Yeah.
And in England, there is a
great suspicion around that,
you know?
>> It's the same in Japan.
>> Yeah, right?
>> Yeah, same in Japan.
>> It's like, don't get
too big for your boots.
So there's a kind
of auto-clampdown
that happens in the
English culture around too
much in the way of
emotion, expression.
Again, a great irony,
because England
has this rich cultural history
around emotion and expression.
But I think all of
that's changing.
I kind of feel
that if America was
the leader for this kind
of stuff for a while,
I feel that things are beginning
to balance out a little bit
more.
That's my perception of it.
But yeah, definitely something
around the clamp in England.
And if you think
about channeling,
it's not about a clamp at all.
It's about opening the clamp.
And it's about
letting something in.
So I think there's a kind of
suspicion or fear in England
that's very specific.
>> Yeah.
And that goes with Japan, too.
>> Right.
>> Having lived in Japan, a lot
of people there even compare it
to England because of
the size of the country,
sort of island
countries in a way,
sort of isolated from
the big continents.
>> Yeah.
>> And yeah, I'm just finding
now these similarities in this
way.
I'm like, hm, I wonder--
there's more similarities than--
>> Yeah, yeah, exactly.
We've had a few lovely
Japanese participants
at workshops who have either
flown to Norway to do workshops
I've done, or other places
around the world I've
held workshops.
And they're really pro,
like, please come to Japan.
We need more of this.
So I hear that a lot.
>> Oh, excellent.
>> I will one day go to Japan.
I would love to.
Yeah.
>> I might be able to help.
We'll talk after.
>> Cool.
OK, great.
Great.
So getting back to
the actual process--
so now, because you
said you do a mixture
of almost channeling slash
intuitive readings, or--
>> Yeah, I do less channeling
these days than ever.
But I'm a big believer
that channeling should
be part of a balanced diet.
So like anything, you know,
it's like if you just do yoga
as your exercise,
your body is going
to be missing other things.
So I kind of do that in my work.
We bring in music.
I work intuitively with
people around their patterns.
And then I bring in as a
kind of grace note, too.
So yeah, a few different ways.
>> Yeah, I noticed that.
We first met at the channel
panel a couple years ago.
And then I sort of did a little
research on, who's this guy?
He's got-- you know, I loved
your channel at that time,
with the Zs.
But then I'd
noticed you do offer
so much more like
a complete package
you're not just
the channeler, Lee.
You're-- you know,
you do all this stuff,
which is quite cool.
I think it's needed.
>> Yeah, it's interesting.
Because I feel like channeling
opened me up in a certain way,
and enhanced my intuition.
It enhanced my
understanding of creativity.
And I'm a big believer
in creativity,
because since I was
little, creativity
has been a part of my life.
So that's one of the
things I love to teach
people to remember as well.
So yeah, the whole smorgasbord,
which is really what channeling
is about.
Channeling, to me, is evidence
of our multi-dimensionality.
So then I'm curious about how
we become more multi-dimensional
as humans, and find the
balance point for ourselves.
Because we're all different,
but there are key things
we all need.
>> You said you sort
of started as an actor,
which I know Nora also
has an acting background.
I know another
channeler who we'll
be interviewing
in the future who
also has an acting background.
Darryl Anka, who
channels Bashar,
is in the entertainment
industry, not necessarily
an actor.
He's more of the artist.
How do you see
those comparisons?
>> Shamanism.
Oh, OK.
>> It's from the
acting as shamanism.
>> Oh, interesting.
Can you go into that?
>> Yeah, I can.
Well, if I just speak
about myself personally,
I didn't have a very strong
self identity as a kid.
Which is not uncommon
with intuitives,
empaths, sensitive people.
It's like you're
lending yourself
out to so many different
places because you don't
know how to be or where to be.
So for me, the
gift of acting was
I didn't really know
who I was, but I
knew how to be this old
man who's having a really--
I could shape-shift.
So yeah, and I wasn't--
even though I got a
lot of lead roles,
it was always as a character.
I was never the lead.
You look at someone like Tom
Cruise, who basically it's
a persona and a personality that
he recycles from role to role.
I was the opposite of that.
I couldn't have been Tom
Cruise if you paid me.
But I could be the weirdest--
it didn't make sense
what I was able to do.
So to me, there's this
great quote about acting.
And it says the theater
is an empathy gym.
And it's a long quote,
but it's basically
talking about the troupe of
actors and the storyteller,
and the director
concoct this thing
that's going to have
an energetic effect
on the audience.
And you take that ride
together every night.
So I did a play in
2014 in Boulder,
in the Fringe Festival.
And it was the
first time I'd done
a play in about five years.
And while I loved
doing it, what I
remembered that I
really loved doing
about it was the community.
It was like I love being in
the wings with fellow actors.
I love rehearsing.
The show itself is great,
but it's over in an hour.
It's all the other stuff.
So for me, what acting really
grounded me in, I think,
that I now look at is, I
didn't know this at the time,
but I was really good at
that audience relationship.
And that was coming from an
empathic intuitive standpoint.
One of the reasons I realized
I was so successful on stage
is because I knew how to ride
the wave of the connection
between me and the audience, and
modify it from night to night.
Oh, they're a bit more muted?
Oh, now we take it down.
And so for me, when
I look back now,
I think that was part of
my success with theater.
And it was the first
place that taught
me the language of an energy
exchange between an audience
and storytellers.
And I feel the same thing
now in a workshop room.
It's like I can feel
the heart of the room,
and I know when to slow it
down, when to speed it up,
when they want a bit more
so that you can direct
what you're doing to kind
of move or open an audience,
open a room.
Yeah, which is-- but
you've stripped away
the story and the script.
You're just working
with what's there.
So it's a bit more raw.
And now I'm used to it.
I wouldn't want to
go back to a script.
But at first it's a bit like,
oh my God, I'm walking in here,
and I'm going to
talk for an hour,
and I don't know what
I'm going to say.
And I just got used
to that, you know?
>> Which was so iconic--
the last channel panel we did--
Rob put together was in the
theater, just the one chair,
spotlight on the--
>> I know.
>> It was kind of
like, oh, this is--
he we are.
We're in theater.
This is great.
And that can have a
negative connotation,
I guess, depending
how you look at it.
I think it's great.
I think this is part of our
human story as storytellers.
But a lot of people,
well, he's just acting,
or they're just acting.
And they just throw it out
there like, well, they're
just actors.
>> But you know what's funny
about that is there is no way
in hell I would give such a bad
performance as a channeler if I
was acting.
Meaning I could do
a way better accent,
I could do a way better voice.
I could be a much more--
>> Oh, I see.
>> You know what I mean?
Like, seriously.
And that was the kind of
thing that was kind of tricky.
Because there are
some very theatrical
channelers out there,
which is kind of
entertaining in its own right if
you're into that kind of thing.
But yeah, for me,
that's the irony.
It's like when I first saw
myself channeling on video--
or heard myself--
it was embarrassing.
Because I was like-- you know,
it was kind of weird to me.
It wasn't what I would
have manipulated.
I would have manipulated
something a bit more a bit more
interesting or a bit more
different than it is.
But you can't-- you
could manipulate it,
but then you would lose the--
you would not be
surrendering to the essence
of what comes through.
So no, I totally--
I've had that
thought many times.
And I honestly I kind
of don't care, because--
>> Yeah, I mean, at this point,
we have to just you know--
because me too, as an
actor, I get the same thing.
I'm the post-- oh, look at
this actor, is this really--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> And I'm like--
>> Well, and that's because
people have a misconception
about acting, too.
Because good acting is truth.
>> Yes.
>> And people believe
that acting is pretend.
And actually I could point
out some pretend performances
from actors, and they
wouldn't move you
the way that those who are
really tapping into something
do.
It's like an actor
is running something
through their system for
the benefit of the story.
If they're faking
it, there's nothing
running through their system.
And you can feel that.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
>> It's face acting
versus feeling acting.
>> Right, and using techniques
and things to just sort of get
by, and get through
the scene or whatever.
But what I think you really
hit on, which maybe even later,
the Zs, when they come through,
we can talk about this.
This has sort of been
the theme, and I think
this is the theme of today is--
I say the theme in
my research and where
I'm going with all this is
this really is about story.
Our entire reality
is about story.
And I think we get so
caught up in the story we
forget that it's a story.
It feels like that's
what's happening now,
and especially in
this time we're in.
And I almost-- it was a
dinner conversation last night
with some other actors.
And I almost-- maybe I
channeled this, I don't know.
I said-- because they
were getting all upset
about the political arena.
And I said, well, how does
that really affect you?
And I said, that's just a
story you're watching on TV.
You're not-- like, in your
life, is there really anything
that is directly affecting you?
Name one thing that
connects this story
that you see on TV, and the
political situation, and all
this thing that it can
actually affect you.
And she couldn't do that.
And I think most of us, if
we really break it down,
we're just buying into these
stories that we're fed.
And then we're reenacting them.
And this is why the art of
storytelling is so important.
Let's, instead of tune
into that message,
let's tune into a message from
some higher vibrational beings
from another dimension.
Why not?
That's a way better story
than listening to the news
and what's going on in our
political arenas right now.
>> Yeah.
And all of our stories
intersect so differently,
which is mind-blowing, isn't it?
When you really
think about it, it's
kind of usually the
key in a disagreement.
It's like, you said this.
No, I was saying this.
But in those two
different realities
with slightly different
ways of feeling, and seeing,
and reading the story
that's going on.
>> That's the conflict aspects.
And then this is the
big resolution part
where we have to have all
this conflict and things.
So we're in Joseph
Campbell's hero's journey.
This is it.
She kind of could relate
to that a little bit.
It's like, yeah,
I think this is--
>> Yeah, that makes a lot of
sense with what we're seeing
and feeling going on
around us right now.
>> Yeah.
And I think if we can
take a step back and look
at it as a story,
right, we can see it
as this is a construct that
we're all feeding, which is not
a bad thing.
This is great.
But if we can see it
from this point of view,
we can see, oh, we're
in the final act,
we're about to go get through
this section of the story.
And then we have all
the sequels to live out
that we get to go through.
>> And it's interesting,
isn't it, how--
just all the dissonance
that we're seeing
play out, even within a
supposed spiritual community.
And I notice a--
and I noticed this in myself,
and I see it in other people
around--
I feel like there's that gap
between who and what we're
opening to becoming, and
where we've come from,
and what our baseline was.
So for example,
our baseline might
have been that we
came from a family
with certain set of beliefs
and a certain way of operating.
And our awakening, whether
that's through our workshops,
or some people are doing
it through ayahuasca--
we were talking about that.
Whatever your awakening
is triggered by,
it shows you the high notes.
And then it's, how do we close
the gap between those two.
And I think, for me,
like, a certain level
of honesty with myself and with
others about the struggle that
can sometimes happen in
there, even if it is a story,
and you're hooked into
the story emotionally
or belief-wise,
just how difficult
that can be sometimes.
And I see a lot of people--
I've seen a lot more people
at the moment throwing knives
at each other rather
than going, oh, I'm
struggling with
this a little bit.
I'm surprised at that
with some people,
based on my belief about
their supposed consciousness
or spirituality.
And I'm not surprised when
I track the messages that
have kind of been coming through
me for several years, where
they've gone, oh, the world's
going to get very emotional.
And I remember I used to
hear that as a good thing--
oh, great.
[CHUCKLES]
Ah, you know, it's going to
be like-- not necessarily.
>> It's a different
kind of emotion.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, different
kind of intensity rising.
And I'm noticing that play
out in spiritual communities.
People-- and I mean, this
has been going on for years.
It's not new.
But there seems to be an
acceleration of break-ups,
and whether that's
business partner, friend.
It's kind of surprising.
Because you think,
oh, wow, I thought,
with a certain level
of consciousness,
or understanding, or equipment
that this wouldn't happen.
But then you have to remember
that it is all perfect.
A dissonance revealed itself.
Your mind was not
seeing the dissonance.
The dissonance came
through the energy bodies.
And the energy bodies
went, oh, we're either done
or we're going to have a break.
Who knows.
Time will tell.
>> So this is kind of-- it's
almost this age of transparency
that we're moving into.
>> Yeah, and it feels very
much like power shifts,
the personal power shift that
leads to the collective power
shift that shows up in
relationships-- power dynamics,
power battles, power resolution.
There's a lot of that going
on that's interesting to me.
That's certainly the thing that
I'm noticing in the last year
or so that's
surprising me the most.
And that could just
be me personally.
>> Well, you brought up
sort of the collective,
and the individual,
and the shift.
And this has been a deep
part of my inner work,
trying to figure out--
probably those who
are watching the show
can see that, through the
questionings and things,
I've been sort of talking
about egos and the collective,
and which comes first.
Can the individual
choose to shift
into the collective reality
that he or she wants to be in?
And then part of me is
like, no, that's already
predetermined in your part--
So it's this paradox.
And I'm trying to pinpoint
which one is the right way.
But it seems like
there is no pinpoint.
It seems like there's some
sort of merging of the two.
>> Yeah, for me, personally,
it's hard for one individual
to be so powerful that they
can override the collective.
That's just my take
on it from what I see.
But equally, I feel--
one of the messages I try
and give to the sensitives
is the impasse that I work with
a lot, because it's something
that took me a long
time to work out,
but it's very liberating
when you ingrain it,
is that your bad day
is never personal.
Your bad moment, the thing
that you're struggling with,
the heavy belief you
have about yourself,
you got it from somewhere.
It either came through your
ancestry and your family
pattern, it came through that
thing someone said to you when
you were 8, and your
self-esteem was low that day,
and it was the first
time you'd been
wounded in the area
of self-esteem,
so you ran with it.
And now it replays
itself from time to time
that the human dis-ease
that we can feel personally
has always come from out here.
Even if you have a really strong
story, and you're like, well,
I feel like I've never been
good at this since birth,
OK, well then something
didn't support you,
or somebody enforced
"you're bad at this."
And you've owned it as your own.
And then on your quiet
days, or your dark days,
or your heavy days,
you're living with it,
blaming yourself, going
round yourself about it.
And it took me many years
of doing that to kind of go,
hang on a second,
this isn't just mine.
This came from somewhere.
And if I stay locked
in, I'm going to suffer,
and it could get worse.
Or if I'm able to express
it to someone else,
or have someone else help me
with it, or move it somehow--
and I still see a lot
of sensitives, empaths,
spiritual people, they're very
willing to open to the higher
stuff, and give power to other
energies, other entities,
other teachers, and thinkers.
But if they're struggling
with something by themselves,
it's all them.
It's all their fault, you know?
And actually if we
can just break that--
>> Well, it's all them,
meaning themselves?
>> --cycle.
Yeah, meaning, this
is all my fault.
I'm having a terrible day,
I'm really down on myself.
And that's the one thing doing
this work has really shown me.
Everybody has that.
Everybody has their
low point And maybe
it's a low point that
they move through.
And it changes, and it morphs.
Maybe it's a low point
they've known for years,
and they've managed to
just slightly increase it.
But everybody takes a
deep, personal, shameful
responsibility around
their low points.
Most people are
generous about thanking
the universe or their
friend for their high point.
So there's this kind of lock in
what happens around the shadow.
And this is where
it's so important
that we talk to each other.
Recently we've just
seen this spate
of suicides in the public eye.
Which whenever anything
happens in the public eye,
it's great, because it just
throw some focus on to people
you may not know because
they're out there in the world.
But so much of the suffering
in silence that happens
comes because we're
still at a point where--
and it's better
than it's ever been,
but we're still at
a point where there
is some kind of shame in
talking about the stuff
that you're struggling
with versus talking about
your successes, your
achievements, the things
that society has said,
oh yeah, great, I
want to hear about the
great exam result you got.
I don't know if I want to
hear that you're in grief.
Don't quite know what to do
with that, feel uncomfortable,
I'll tell you I
feel uncomfortable.
So we learn to silence.
And I think the best
communities, they really
support that energy.
>> Sure.
Well, it's interesting
because I know,
through all this channeling
and other shamanic work
that I've been
doing, we're always
told to take responsibility.
And maybe there's
a fine line that's
getting confused that we're
taking responsibility,
meaning it's all mine.
All the dirt and all
the crap, it's all mine,
like you were saying.
And we keep that in because
that's maybe the messages we're
getting is you have to own it.
And many says you have to
own it in order to shift it,
which I believe is true.
But maybe we're-- like you
said, there's this fine line
of owning it, and just keeping
it all in, and then you can
still own it, it's still yours,
but you can still say it came
from these other places.
And then that way it
lightens up the burden.
>> Well, and I guess a lot of
this is the tone that we use
with ourselves.
So for example, you could say--
so if the sentence is you've got
to own it so you can shift it,
I could sit here and
say, you've got to own it
so you can shift it, Ruben.
Or I could sit here
and I could go,
(SHARPLY) you've got to own
it so you can shift it, Ruben.
And there's a whole lot of other
levels in between those tones.
But they're very different,
those two that I just did.
And the way that we--
sorry, I don't mean--
just checking that I didn't--
[MAKES GUTTURAL SOUND]
>> No, no.
>> --at you.
>> But I felt it.
>> No, and I saw you shift,
which is why I was just
checking.
Because we're sensitive
to that stuff.
>> My process was, oh, this
is the example, this is great.
>> Right, right, right.
But yeah, I was--
>> No, I learned the hard way
when I demonstrated something
like that to a group in 2013.
And I shocked the hell
out of the front row.
And I felt bad after doing it.
And I checked with them.
And they were like,
no, no, it's fine.
It just reminded me of my dad.
And I'm like, OK, it's
a healing workshop.
But still, I don't want to
put more of that out there.
But it shows you the difference.
And so I think this is the
problem with spiritual rules
or spiritual statements.
They can be applied
personally on any given day.
So one day we need to go, oh,
I need to take responsibility.
Because perhaps you've
been a bit negligent.
And to come back to
balance, you need
to take some responsibility.
But on another day, if
you're someone who--
or if you're just someone who
takes a lot of responsibility,
you probably need to
learn to lighten up a bit.
So spiritual rules are tricky.
Because it is not
one rule fits all,
and it is not one rule
fits all on a certain day.
And so my acid
test for people is,
does the spiritual rule make
you feel more open, more loving
toward yourself, or does it
make you judge or hate yourself
more?
And I think sometimes
people who are
in a cycle of judging
and hating themselves
grab the latest spiritual rule.
You see it a lot with illness.
Oh my God, I got cancer.
What does this mean I did?
And my thing is, if you've just
found out you've got cancer,
this is not necessarily the
time to go digging emotionally.
That's just going
to torment you.
Now you go, OK, what do
I need for my healing?
What do I need right now?
This is happening in real time.
Rather than digging
into what I didn't do,
maybe I can look at
that later if I still
feel resonant around it.
But there's a lot
of that stuff that
happens in the spiritual
community that can be alarming.
Because I think it's just--
it's if those rules don't
help people self-care--
and I've been there too.
I've kind of done
that "hard on myself"
thing with spirituality.
>> Well, we were just
talking before the interview,
before we started,
about supplements,
and even ayahuasca, and
some of these entheogens,
and how it's very personalized.
It's not for everybody.
And how we have
to sort of cater.
That we can't say,
oh, everybody should
be taking this supplement,
or everybody should
go have an ayahuasca journey.
It's very unique.
And you're sort of saying the
same thing with spirituality,
with all these teachings.
There is no one fix,
one channel that's
going to solve all the
problems, one being
from the galactic
wherever, and that they're
going to fix everything.
It just seems
that's not the case.
>> Yeah.
And we were talking
about supplements,
and you were you were
talking about how
some people in the
spiritual community
just don't believe
in supplements.
And I was saying that
what the Zs would say
is whether the supplement
itself is doing you any good
or not, what is
doing you some good
is the vibration of you wanting
to take supplements to support
your health, because that's
a direct energy of supporting
your health.
So there's the
physical plane, 3D,
and what the physical
is doing to us,
and then there's the energetic.
And so somebody who has that
act of caretaking of themselves
is nurturing themselves.
And that in itself is an energy.
>> And I need to
nurture the nurturing.
Because sometimes I get hung up.
I'll be like, why am I
taking these supplements?
I know I don't need
all these supplements.
But I still take these.
And then I'm beating
myself up, judging myself,
I'm taking all
these supplements,
knowing that I have the power
to not take the supplements.
But like you said,
nurturing the idea
that this process, this ritual
of taking the supplements,
is itself nurturing myself.
Therefore I need
to nurture this.
Therefore I don't
need to beat myself up
for taking supplements.
>> No, it's actually
just-- yeah,
because also the truth is--
and they talked about this with
addiction--
that if we can release
the judgment cycle that
holds our patterns in place,
then our patterns often
change organically anyway.
So for example, yes, you'll
have a happier life if you go,
oh, I'm a bit of a
monk and a warrior,
and that's part of my archetype.
And monks and warriors are
quite diligent about the way
they look after themselves.
And we know that's
part of your archetype.
So if you can just let
yourself be OK with doing it,
it's either going to carry on
or it's going to slightly shift.
But it's often that the judgment
cycle holds us in a pattern
that can be destructive
towards us, which in your case,
it isn't.
But it's interesting, isn't it?
>> I have to keep
myself in check, though.
Because sometimes I think
I do fall into patterns
and ways of things that--
>> I think we all do.
And I think that's one of the
difficult things about being
human.
Because especially
when you learn
about spirituality and
energy, you start to go, God,
I'm really flawed.
Oh my God.
I've got a really
long way to go.
And I think that part of it
is that that stuff can enhance
our humanity, and that we're
supposed to bring as much
of that in as we can, but it's
not like a hardline "you must."
And if ever it is
coming in in that way,
then that's an interesting
thing to look at.
Why are you so
aligned with this--
[WHIP NOISE]
Because I do really
think that being human
is a difficult thing.
And I come from a
privileged place.
I've never been on the streets.
I've never been physically
or violently-- you know,
there's certain things that
other people have gone through
that I know I haven't.
But I still recognize,
as most people do,
there is a wonder about being
on this planet and being human,
and there is a struggle
and the suffering side.
And you only have to look at the
world and the map of the world
to see the truth of both.
So I think that's important
to acknowledge too.
But I think if we were
all acknowledging this
with each other more.
And I see this in
12-step communities.
So I'm close to a few
people in 12-step.
So I spent some time
in the 12-step rooms.
And I thought they
were fantastic if,
for nothing else, because
you go around the room,
and for five minutes, you
hear a bunch of people talk
about what's going on.
And obviously there's a lot
of humor in those rooms.
It's not the kind of
tragic, crying fests
that movies make it out to be.
But what you hear is
people's underneath.
And you're in a
room for an hour,
and you hear
people's underneath.
And I was in there going, oh my
God, this is like my workshops.
But it's timed.
It's an hour long.
But that's really powerful
and very galvanizing,
I think, to hear the
struggles of the human spirit.
And that somehow connects you
to yourself and other people
with the energy of
struggle present.
And it has a very uplifting
effect versus, I think,
that whole silence around that
stuff, where so many people are
walking around the world
with fears or hesitations
that they're not sharing
with other people.
And that was what blew my mind
when I started doing this work.
I started to feel a bit more
normal, because I was like,
wow, this person is sharing
this intimate thing with me.
And you start to
see, after working
with thousands and thousands of
people, you're like, oh, wow,
this is just a map.
This is going on for
everybody at some level.
And it's really
helpful when you know
that because it helps you take
the pressure off yourself.
Well, that was one
of my greatest--
I think the greatest
aspect of the ayahuasca
journeys and the
ceremonies that I sat in,
is that they would become very--
after this experience, this deep
transformational experience,
for me, the biggest
part of the experience
was the sharing part.
Sitting in the
circle, everyone's
sharing their experience
from the night before, which
then leads down to years
of trauma in the past,
or these other things,
and these resolves.
Usually there's some sort of
resolve in these ceremonies.
But that sharing aspect drew me.
And that's why I
picked up the camera
and I started shooting
these ceremonies,
and doing this
documentary I'm doing now
with the shamanic teachings
and how that all works.
It's very much like a 12-step--
you know, sitting around.
And then-- we were
just talking earlier--
it comes down to story.
Everybody's just
sharing their story.
And everybody's listening,
and integrating.
We're integrating
each other's stories,
and we're feeling the
empathy for each other,
and trying to support.
And afterwards, how
can I help you out?
Let's go have a
meal, and let's go--
is there anything
I can do for you?
And building community
and all that.
>> It really creates connection
when people have that.
And I think there's a
perception that often, oh, I
can't tell them
that because they'll
ostracize me or reject me.
And yet the opposite is true.
It's interesting.
We just came back two days
ago from North Carolina.
And we were running
a five-day retreat.
And you know, I do
about eight a year,
eight events or retreats a year.
And what is present
in the room, I
think, on the second-to-last
day in that retreat,
very organically, because
we had created a space where
everything was allowed,
we had three people
talk about some pretty
harrowing child sexual abuse
experiences they'd had.
And we had a couple of other
people talk about attacks.
But it came up within this
container that we'd created,
where there was a lot of
love, there was laughter.
And then in this came.
Because there was
the safety of, we're
going to talk about the
underside as well as the aim,
where you'd like to go and
where you've come from.
And people just were
in love with each other
on the last day,
and like a family,
and because that was
allowed to be present too.
And I've noticed that
if it isn't allowed
to be present then
there's always something
missing in a connection.
If the shadow can't
be loved, honored,
and accepted by another
person in the room, then
there's never a
full intimacy, which
is so missing in our
training as human beings.
It's so kind of whitewashed
in our schooling
and in our education systems.
But it feels like, at the
moment, that's changing.
Certainly different
to 20 years ago.
And we'll see what it's
like 20 years from now.
But there's definitely
a movement right
now to discuss and own the
shadow in a whole new way.
>> Yeah, well, hats
off to your work,
and for embracing the shadow.
Like our conversation here,
I think it's much needed.
We definitely-- I'm seeing
it in my circles, and life,
and research, and my journeys.
I'm like, oh yeah,
this is definitely
a big aspect of what's needed
in the spiritual communities
and the work.
And so for you offering this
and doing this, it's huge.
>> Thank you.
I'm compelled.
[CHUCKLES]
I think it's what I
needed when I was younger.
And like you going around
doing what you're doing,
and talking to, and creating
conversation, and recording.
Thank you for doing
what you're doing.
We all do our little bit, right?
And then if we add our piece to
the puzzle, a puzzle happens.
>> Yeah, a beautiful picture.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> Well, I look forward to
getting some channeling later.
>> Awesome.
>> And thank you.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is how the earth
was meant to be.
And the single focus that
many of you have at this time
is so directly experienced
by you and for you
because you are not
living communally.
We mean by the joy
of Earth is to be
in this egoic body and
this singular form,
and get to have this very
responsive experience that you
have as a human that is very
different when you are out
of the body.
Many of you want
to die so that you
can experience that oneness.
We would challenge you and
say, it is very easy for you
to die as human beings.
You can die in an instant.
So if you are still
here, get curious
about why you are, and start
to explore oneness in your life
now.
Because it will be
good for you, and it
will be good for the planet.
You're still alive.
You're not supposed
to die yet, which
means you're supposed to
discover a new level of living.